.. _changes_v2_0_0:

================================
Version 2.0.0 (October 15, 2019)
================================

- Migrated to the latest version of Python, numpy, scipy, and pandas.
  See setup.py for required minimum versions of those tools.

- Python 2.x is no longer supported.

- Improved DL input structure to

  - make it easier to define complex performance models,

  - make input files easier to read,

  - support custom, non-PACT units for component quantities,

  - and support different component quantities on every floor.

- Updated FEMA P58 DL data to use ea for equipment instead of units such as KV, CF, AP, TN.

- Added FEMA P58 2nd edition DL data.

- Support for EDP inputs in standard csv format.

- Added a function that produces SimCenter DM and DV json output files.

- Added a differential evolution algorithm to the EDP fitting function to do a better job at finding the global optimum.

- Enhanced DL_calculation.py to handle multi-stripe analysis (significant contributions by Joanna Zou):

  - Recognize stripe_ID and occurrence rate in BIM/EVENT file.

  - Fit a collapse fragility function to empirical collapse probabilities.

  - Perform loss assessment for each stripe independently and produce corresponding outputs.

================================
Version 1.2.0 (October 15, 2019)
================================

- Added support for HAZUS hurricane wind damage and loss assessment.
- Added HAZUS hurricane DL data for wooden houses.
- Moved DL resources inside the pelicun folder so that they come with pelicun when it is pip installed.
- Add various options for EDP fitting and collapse probability estimation.
- Improved the way warning messages are printed to make them more useful.
