.. _changes_v3.9.0:

===============================
Version 3.9.0 (April 20, 2026)
===============================

The headline change in 3.9.0 is **multi-hazard regional simulation**:
the ``regional_sim`` tool now handles Hazus Hurricane Wind alongside
earthquake, and has been restructured around a configuration-driven
Intensity Measure model and a conditional loss-assessment framework
that generalizes cleanly to additional hazards. Alongside this, a
**building inventory filter** lets users run on any subset of an
asset list, and the **NNR** resampler has been extended to operate on
3D per-realization arrays with a configurable neighbor count.

On the runtime side, pelicun is now fully **numpy 2 compatible**, and
its dependency ranges have been revisited against what the code
actually uses — raising the pandas, numpy, and scipy floors, widening
the upper bounds, and clearing the ~720 pandas / numpy deprecation
warnings previously emitted by the test suite.

Added
-----

**Multi-Hazard Regional Simulation**: The ``regional_sim`` tool now
supports configurable hazards beyond earthquake.

- Add support for the **Hazus Hurricane Wind** damage and loss
  methodology.
- Introduce a new end-to-end integration test for the hurricane wind
  scenario, with a dedicated, hazard-specific pytest fixture.

**Building Inventory Filter**: Run simulations on a specific subset of
assets.

- Add a ``filter`` key to the ``regional_sim`` configuration that
  selects buildings by ID and ID ranges (e.g., ``"1, 5-10"``).
- Add a parametrized test suite covering success and error-handling
  scenarios for the filter.

**Enhanced Regional Simulation Testing**: Add the first comprehensive
integration tests for the ``regional_sim`` tool, establishing a
testing baseline for future changes.

**NNR (Nearest Neighbor Resampling) Enhancements**:

- The "expected value" mode now operates on each realization of a 3D
  input array independently.
- The 2D expected value path is now vectorized for improved
  performance.
- The number of nearest neighbors is now a configurable parameter.

**numpy 2 Support**: Pelicun now runs against numpy 2 (verified on
numpy 2.0 through 2.4).

**Module Entry Point**: ``python -m pelicun`` now dispatches to the
CLI, complementing the existing ``pelicun`` console script.

Changed
-------

**Regional Simulation Workflow**: Major refactoring of the
``regional_sim`` script for improved flexibility and robustness.

- Generalize the Intensity Measure (IM) handling to be dynamically
  driven by the configuration file, removing all hardcoded "PGA"
  logic.
- Rearchitect the loss assessment logic into a conditional framework,
  with a dedicated path for complex Hazus Earthquake models and an
  efficient 1-to-1 mapping path for other methods.
- Reorganize the output stage to save results sequentially, improving
  robustness against failures in later-stage calculations.
- Upsample demand realizations when the requested sample size is
  larger than the available data.

**Runtime Dependency Ranges**: Broadened upper bounds and raised lower
bounds to reflect what the code actually supports.

- ``numpy``: ``<2.0`` -> ``>=1.23, <3.0``
- ``scipy``: ``<=1.15.3`` -> ``>=1.8.0, <1.16`` (scipy 1.16 removed
  the private ``stats._mvn`` module imported by ``uq.py``).
- ``pandas``: ``>=1.4.0`` -> ``>=2.2.3, <3.0`` (the code uses
  ``future.no_silent_downcasting`` and ``GroupBy.first(skipna=False)``,
  which are only available from pandas 2.2.1+).
- ``tqdm``, ``requests``, ``joblib``, ``scikit-learn``, ``packaging``:
  switched from unpinned to explicit compatibility ranges.

**Configuration (breaking)**: ``regional_sim`` now requires a
``neighbors`` key under
``Applications/RegionalMapping/Buildings/ApplicationData`` in the run
configuration.

Removed
-------

(none)

Fixed
-----

**Pandas / numpy Deprecation Warnings**: A full-suite test run previously
emitted ~720 deprecation warnings. The following underlying call sites
were corrected so that the suite now runs warning-free apart from
pelicun's own intentional ``PelicunWarning`` emissions:

- ``base.convert_dtypes``: replace deprecated
  ``pd.to_numeric(..., errors='ignore')`` with an explicit try/except
  fallback.
- ``DemandModel.estimate_RID``: replace a ``DataFrame.stack`` trick
  used only for MultiIndex construction with a direct
  ``pd.MultiIndex.from_tuples`` call.
- Unit-label assignments in ``assessment.calculate_demand``,
  ``assessment._add_units``, and ``DemandModel.add_column``: build the
  mixed-dtype "Units" row with an explicit object dtype so string
  labels no longer trigger a float64 -> object upcast warning.
- ~27 ``DataFrame.groupby(..., axis=1)`` call sites in the damage /
  loss / regional-sim / DL_calculation paths: rewritten as
  ``df.T.groupby(...)...T``.

**Damage Model — Fragility Scaling with Unspecified Distribution**:
``ScalingSpecification`` entries targeting components whose
distribution family is missing (stored as NaN, e.g., Hazus
``collapse-0-1``) are now scaled as deterministic capacities instead
of being silently ignored with a warning. This aligns
``damage_model.ds_model._create_dmg_rvs`` with the existing behavior
of ``uq.rv_class_map``.

**Code Quality and Documentation**: Continued compliance with ruff,
full type hints and docstring added to the ``NNR`` function.

**CLI Subprocess Tests**: The three ``pelicun`` CLI integration tests
now invoke the CLI via ``[sys.executable, '-m', 'pelicun', ...]`` so
they use the same interpreter / virtualenv as the test runner,
instead of whichever ``pelicun`` script happens to come first on
``PATH``.
